README.md, before:

# GeoControl API

## Installation and Setup

### Prerequisites

Before starting, ensure you have the following installed on your system:

- **Node.js** (Recommended version: latest LTS)
- **npm** (Node Package Manager, included with Node.js)

### Installing Dependencies

Run the following command to install all required dependencies:

```sh
npm install
```

### Running the Application

#### Starting the API Server

To start the server, run:

```sh
npm start
```

By default, the server runs on

**http://localhost:5000**.

#### Development Mode (Hot Reloading)

For development with hot reloading, use:

```sh
npm run dev
```

This mode restarts the server automatically when code changes.

#### Debugging

For debugging with hot reloading enabled:

- On **Windows**:

  ```sh
  npm run debug-win
  ```

- On **Unix/Linux**:

  ```sh
  npm run debug-unix
  ```

#### Creating the Root User

To create the SQLite database file and add to it an admin user with credentials `root:rootpassword`, execute:

```sh
npm run create-root
```

#### Running Tests

To run the test, the command provided is:

```sh
npm test
```

which runs the test with coverage using Jest

### Windows Execution Policy Issue

If you encounter an execution policy error like:

```
+ CategoryInfo          : SecurityError: (:) [], PSSecurityException
+ FullyQualifiedErrorId : UnauthorizedAccess
```

Run the following command before executing scripts:

```sh
Set-ExecutionPolicy -Scope Process -ExecutionPolicy Bypass
```

## API Documentation

The API follows an **OpenAPI specification**, with the definition stored in:

```
doc/swagger_v1.yaml
```

Once the application is running, the **Swagger UI** is available at:

**http://localhost:5000/api/v1/doc**

The Swagger documentation provides a complete definition and description of the system, including object schemas, detailed endpoint specifications with input and output parameters, error definitions, and a brief functional overview of each API operation. It serves as the authoritative reference for understanding how the system is designed to function.

## Project Structure

The project follows a **modular architecture**, ensuring maintainability, separation of concerns, and scalability. Each module is structured to serve a specific purpose.

### `/coverage`

- Contains the **HTML and summary reports** generated from the last test run.  
  This folder is **excluded from version control** and automatically generated or updated at each test execution.

### `/data`

- Contains the SQLite database file. This folder is **excluded from version control**.

### `/doc`

- Contains the OpenAPI specification file (swagger) used to define the application external interface.

### `/docker`

- Contains everything needed to **containerize the application** and run it with Docker Compose.
- To run the following commands, [Docker Desktop](https://www.docker.com/products/docker-desktop) is required  
  (On Linux, you can install Docker Engine and CLI from your distribution's package manager too)

- **`/backend`**

  - Contains the `Dockerfile` for building the backend Node.js application. It is intentionally left empty, as completing it is part of task 4. When the container starts, it must first run the `create-root` script, which waits for the database to become available and creates the **default admin user** if it does not exist. Afterwards, it launches the actual backend server.

  **Build the backend image manually (from the project root):**

  ```bash
  docker build -t geocontrol-backend -f docker/backend/Dockerfile .
  ```

  **Run the container after building the image:**

  ```bash
  docker run -d --name geocontrol-backend -p 5000:5000 geocontrol-backend
  ```

- **`/db`**

  - Contains the `init.sql` script used to initialize the MySQL database.  
    The script creates the database, user, and password based on the **environment variables** defined in the `docker-compose.yml` file.  
    This initialization is executed **only on the first startup**, if the database volume is empty.

- **`/frontend`**

  - Contains the `env-vars.json` file, which defines environment variables for the front end such as the server port and server host. The default values can be customized in this file. In order to take effect, it must be mounted inside the front-end container, which is already done in the provided Docker Compose file.

- **`docker-compose.yml`**

  - Defines a three-service setup:
    - The **frontend**
    - The **backend server**
    - The **MySQL database**
  - The frontend image is pulled from a public DockerHub
  - All configuration parameters (e.g. ports, database name, credentials) are centralized and reused across all services.
  - The backend container uses an internal script to **wait for the database to be ready** before attempting any connection.

  **Run the Docker Compose (from `/docker` folder):**

  ```bash
  docker compose up
  ```

  **Run the Docker Compose updating service images if newer versions exist:**

  ```bash
  docker compose up --pull always
  ```

  **Run the Docker Compose with automatic rebuild of the backend image:**

  ```bash
  docker compose up --build
  ```

  **Stop and remove containers:**

  ```bash
  docker compose down
  ```

  **Stop, remove containers and reset volumes (reset the DB):**

  ```bash
  docker compose down -v
  ```

### `/logs`

- Contains all the log files generated by the application:
  - error.log: contains only the errors logged by the application
  - combined.log: contains all the logs generated by the application
- This folder is **excluded from version control**

### `/scripts`

- Contains the set-up scripts for the application.

### `/src` - Main source folder

Contains all the following subfolders with the source code.

- **`/config`**

  - Contains global configuration files.

- **`/controllers`**

  - Handle the request processing logic and call the appropriate services.

- **`/database`**

  - Manages database connection and initialization.

- **`/middlewares`**

  - Contains Express middleware for authentication, validation, and error handling.

- **`/models`**

  - **`/dao`**: Represents **database entities** using TypeORM.
  - **`/dto`**: Contains **Data Transfer Objects (DTOs)** generated automatically from OpenAPI.
  - **`/errors`**: Contains all the custom error classes

- **`/repositories`**

  - Implements data access logic to interact with the database.

- **`/routes`**

  - Defines API endpoints and maps them to controllers.

- **`/services`**

  - Contains business logic and helper functions.

- **`/utils.ts`**
  - Provides utility functions used across the project.

### `/test` - Test folder

- Contains all **unit tests** and **integration tests** for the project. The tests are written using **Jest**, a popular JavaScript testing framework.

- **`/e2e`**

  - Contains end-to-end tests.
  - Includes **an example test** of a full stack execution flow of one of the users endpoints, using the actual in-memory datasource.

- **`/integration`**

  - Contains integration tests
  - Includes **two example tests**, one for the `userController` integration with `mapperService` and the second one for the integration of `userRoutes` with its middleware layer.

- **`/postman_colection`**

  - Contains a **complete Postman test suite** that can be used to manually test the API endpoints defined in **Swagger**.
    **[Download Postman](https://www.postman.com/downloads/)** to import the test collection (`GeoControl API Full Test Suite.postman_collection.json`) and run the requests against the API.

- **`/setup`**

  - Contains the configuration for the **in-memory SQLite test datasource** used during automated tests.

- **`/unit`**
  - Contains the unit tests
  - Includes **two example tests** for the `UserRepository` class:  
    one using full mocking, and one using the actual in-memory datasource which will be used by the final end-to-end tests.

### Path Aliases

To avoid relative imports, TypeScript path aliases are defined in `tsconfig.json`:

```json
    "paths": {
      "@models/*": ["models/*"],
      "@errors/*": ["models/errors/*"],
      "@dao/*": ["models/dao/*"],
      "@dto/*": ["models/dto/*"],
      "@repositories/*": ["repositories/*"],
      "@services/*": ["services/*"],
      "@routes/*": ["routes/*"],
      "@controllers/*": ["controllers/*"],
      "@middlewares/*": ["middlewares/*"],
      "@database": ["database/connection.ts"],
      "@config": ["config/config.ts"],
      "@utils": ["utils.ts"],
      "@app": ["app.ts"],
      "@test/*": ["../test/*"]
    }
```

This allows importing modules like:

```
import { UserRepository } from "@repositories/UserRepository";
```

instead of using relative paths like:

```
import { UserRepository } from "../repositories/UserRepository";
```

## API Versioning

All API endpoints include `/v1/` in their URL paths (e.g., `/api/v1/users`).

This approach allows for backward compatibility when introducing breaking changes in the future. If a newer version of an endpoint requires different input parameters or returns a different response structure, a new version (e.g., `/api/v2/users`) can be created while keeping the old version operational. This prevents service disruptions for existing clients that depend on previous API versions.

Commit message:

Update README with project details and setup instructions
Added project description and installation instructions.

README.md, after:

# GeoControl API
###
This is a copy of a gitlab repo used for a group project for an Univerisity exam (Software Engineering)
## Installation and Setup

### Prerequisites

Before starting, ensure you have the following installed on your system:

- **Node.js** (Recommended version: latest LTS)
- **npm** (Node Package Manager, included with Node.js)

### Installing Dependencies

Run the following command to install all required dependencies:

```sh
npm install
```

### Running the Application

#### Starting the API Server

To start the server, run:

```sh
npm start
```

By default, the server runs on

**http://localhost:5000**.

#### Development Mode (Hot Reloading)

For development with hot reloading, use:

```sh
npm run dev
```

This mode restarts the server automatically when code changes.

#### Debugging

For debugging with hot reloading enabled:

- On **Windows**:

  ```sh
  npm run debug-win
  ```

- On **Unix/Linux**:

  ```sh
  npm run debug-unix
  ```

#### Creating the Root User

To create the SQLite database file and add to it an admin user with credentials `root:rootpassword`, execute:

```sh
npm run create-root
```

#### Running Tests

To run the test, the command provided is:

```sh
npm test
```

which runs the test with coverage using Jest

### Windows Execution Policy Issue

If you encounter an execution policy error like:

```
+ CategoryInfo          : SecurityError: (:) [], PSSecurityException
+ FullyQualifiedErrorId : UnauthorizedAccess
```

Run the following command before executing scripts:

```sh
Set-ExecutionPolicy -Scope Process -ExecutionPolicy Bypass
```

## API Documentation

The API follows an **OpenAPI specification**, with the definition stored in:

```
doc/swagger_v1.yaml
```

Once the application is running, the **Swagger UI** is available at:

**http://localhost:5000/api/v1/doc**

The Swagger documentation provides a complete definition and description of the system, including object schemas, detailed endpoint specifications with input and output parameters, error definitions, and a brief functional overview of each API operation. It serves as the authoritative reference for understanding how the system is designed to function.

## Project Structure

The project follows a **modular architecture**, ensuring maintainability, separation of concerns, and scalability. Each module is structured to serve a specific purpose.

### `/coverage`

- Contains the **HTML and summary reports** generated from the last test run.  
  This folder is **excluded from version control** and automatically generated or updated at each test execution.

### `/data`

- Contains the SQLite database file. This folder is **excluded from version control**.

### `/doc`

- Contains the OpenAPI specification file (swagger) used to define the application external interface.

### `/docker`

- Contains everything needed to **containerize the application** and run it with Docker Compose.
- To run the following commands, [Docker Desktop](https://www.docker.com/products/docker-desktop) is required  
  (On Linux, you can install Docker Engine and CLI from your distribution's package manager too)

- **`/backend`**

  - Contains the `Dockerfile` for building the backend Node.js application. It is intentionally left empty, as completing it is part of task 4. When the container starts, it must first run the `create-root` script, which waits for the database to become available and creates the **default admin user** if it does not exist. Afterwards, it launches the actual backend server.

  **Build the backend image manually (from the project root):**

  ```bash
  docker build -t geocontrol-backend -f docker/backend/Dockerfile .
  ```

  **Run the container after building the image:**

  ```bash
  docker run -d --name geocontrol-backend -p 5000:5000 geocontrol-backend
  ```

- **`/db`**

  - Contains the `init.sql` script used to initialize the MySQL database.  
    The script creates the database, user, and password based on the **environment variables** defined in the `docker-compose.yml` file.  
    This initialization is executed **only on the first startup**, if the database volume is empty.

- **`/frontend`**

  - Contains the `env-vars.json` file, which defines environment variables for the front end such as the server port and server host. The default values can be customized in this file. In order to take effect, it must be mounted inside the front-end container, which is already done in the provided Docker Compose file.

- **`docker-compose.yml`**

  - Defines a three-service setup:
    - The **frontend**
    - The **backend server**
    - The **MySQL database**
  - The frontend image is pulled from a public DockerHub
  - All configuration parameters (e.g. ports, database name, credentials) are centralized and reused across all services.
  - The backend container uses an internal script to **wait for the database to be ready** before attempting any connection.

  **Run the Docker Compose (from `/docker` folder):**

  ```bash
  docker compose up
  ```

  **Run the Docker Compose updating service images if newer versions exist:**

  ```bash
  docker compose up --pull always
  ```

  **Run the Docker Compose with automatic rebuild of the backend image:**

  ```bash
  docker compose up --build
  ```

  **Stop and remove containers:**

  ```bash
  docker compose down
  ```

  **Stop, remove containers and reset volumes (reset the DB):**

  ```bash
  docker compose down -v
  ```

### `/logs`

- Contains all the log files generated by the application:
  - error.log: contains only the errors logged by the application
  - combined.log: contains all the logs generated by the application
- This folder is **excluded from version control**

### `/scripts`

- Contains the set-up scripts for the application.

### `/src` - Main source folder

Contains all the following subfolders with the source code.

- **`/config`**

  - Contains global configuration files.

- **`/controllers`**

  - Handle the request processing logic and call the appropriate services.

- **`/database`**

  - Manages database connection and initialization.

- **`/middlewares`**

  - Contains Express middleware for authentication, validation, and error handling.

- **`/models`**

  - **`/dao`**: Represents **database entities** using TypeORM.
  - **`/dto`**: Contains **Data Transfer Objects (DTOs)** generated automatically from OpenAPI.
  - **`/errors`**: Contains all the custom error classes

- **`/repositories`**

  - Implements data access logic to interact with the database.

- **`/routes`**

  - Defines API endpoints and maps them to controllers.

- **`/services`**

  - Contains business logic and helper functions.

- **`/utils.ts`**
  - Provides utility functions used across the project.

### `/test` - Test folder

- Contains all **unit tests** and **integration tests** for the project. The tests are written using **Jest**, a popular JavaScript testing framework.

- **`/e2e`**

  - Contains end-to-end tests.
  - Includes **an example test** of a full stack execution flow of one of the users endpoints, using the actual in-memory datasource.

- **`/integration`**

  - Contains integration tests
  - Includes **two example tests**, one for the `userController` integration with `mapperService` and the second one for the integration of `userRoutes` with its middleware layer.

- **`/postman_colection`**

  - Contains a **complete Postman test suite** that can be used to manually test the API endpoints defined in **Swagger**.
    **[Download Postman](https://www.postman.com/downloads/)** to import the test collection (`GeoControl API Full Test Suite.postman_collection.json`) and run the requests against the API.

- **`/setup`**

  - Contains the configuration for the **in-memory SQLite test datasource** used during automated tests.

- **`/unit`**
  - Contains the unit tests
  - Includes **two example tests** for the `UserRepository` class:  
    one using full mocking, and one using the actual in-memory datasource which will be used by the final end-to-end tests.

### Path Aliases

To avoid relative imports, TypeScript path aliases are defined in `tsconfig.json`:

```json
    "paths": {
      "@models/*": ["models/*"],
      "@errors/*": ["models/errors/*"],
      "@dao/*": ["models/dao/*"],
      "@dto/*": ["models/dto/*"],
      "@repositories/*": ["repositories/*"],
      "@services/*": ["services/*"],
      "@routes/*": ["routes/*"],
      "@controllers/*": ["controllers/*"],
      "@middlewares/*": ["middlewares/*"],
      "@database": ["database/connection.ts"],
      "@config": ["config/config.ts"],
      "@utils": ["utils.ts"],
      "@app": ["app.ts"],
      "@test/*": ["../test/*"]
    }
```

This allows importing modules like:

```
import { UserRepository } from "@repositories/UserRepository";
```

instead of using relative paths like:

```
import { UserRepository } from "../repositories/UserRepository";
```

## API Versioning

All API endpoints include `/v1/` in their URL paths (e.g., `/api/v1/users`).

This approach allows for backward compatibility when introducing breaking changes in the future. If a newer version of an endpoint requires different input parameters or returns a different response structure, a new version (e.g., `/api/v2/users`) can be created while keeping the old version operational. This prevents service disruptions for existing clients that depend on previous API versions.
